Welcome back to
Practical Time Series Analysis.
In this lecture, we review the partial
autocorrelation concepts, in effect,
we try to understand it
just how it's calculated.
We've seen that for an ERP process,
the PACF can be a really good tool
to tell us the order of the process.
We look at the PACF and
we determine when the spikes
essentially die down into noise.
We'd like to know just what
is being measured, however.
After this lecture, you'll be able to,
in a regression sense, and
we'll apply that to time series, you'll
be able to partial out a variable, and
you'll be able to describe to a friend or
colleague what the PACF measures.
This very nice example available
in several text books and
also some of the our packages,
having to do with body fat.
To measure body fat is a pretty expensive
and laborious process involving
people getting into big vast of water,
etc., and looking at their displacement.
It would be nice if there was a simple,
fast,
cheap, way, non-invasive way,
to get the same kind of measurement.
And so, what this data set explores is,
why is it measuring somethings with
essentially a caliper and a tape measure.
Triceps skinfold thickness,
thigh circumference, and
mid-arm circumference to see if
those would be good proxies,
if we could build the good
regression model for
body fat based upon these simple,
easy to measure variables.
If you look at the data set,
the results look rather promising.
If you want, you may have access to
these data sets somewhere else but
I'm going to show you that you can
get it through the isdals library.
We'll just bring the body
fat data set into play.
I like to always attach, so
I can just call the variables directly.
And, in order to run the pairs command,
in order to look at graphs of one on one
plots, we'll put the variables into
a matrix and then we were in pairs.
You can see the triceps, its really
a decent predictor of fat, so is thigh.
Thigh is a good predictor of fat.
The thing that's interesting or annoying
from our aggression point of view is that,
triceps and thigh are themselves
very strongly correlated.
And so, that can produce
problems in a regression model.
Your coefficients maybe hard to estimate,
interval estimates may become wider
rather elusive to statistical power.
There are reasons why we would like to
not have too many correlated variables in
one regression model.
So, we're not really going to explore
a multicollinearity in any kind of
systematic way.
What we are going to do is,
confirm numerically that,
yes, the correlations between fat and
triceps and thigh and fat,
they're both pretty high and
also between thigh and triceps.
Our job right now is to try to measure
the correlation of thighs and triceps for
instance.
After we control for,
we'll hear people say, partialing out and
after we partial out on thigh, what
we're going to do is look at residuals.
So if that seems unmotivated, think about
it like this, we'll try to take fat and
predict it using thigh.
So we're trying to find the linear
component of thigh in fat,
speaking loosely.
If we look at the residuals,
we're extracting the linear
predictive power of thigh on fat.
We'll do the same thing with thigh and
triceps.
We're essentially subtracting
at the linear relationship here.
After that's removed, we then see
how fat and triceps are correlated.
And we'll call that a partial
correlation of fat and triceps.
To operationalize,
this is really quite simple.
Lm is the command that'll
give us the linear model.
And if you're comfortable with R,
you're probably comfortable
nesting commands like this.
We'll do a linear regression of fat and
thigh.
We'll interrogate that model
with the predict command
in order to give us our hat values.
Things with a hat on them
are things being estimated, so
fat.hat is how fat is estimated in
the model used in thigh, linear model.
Same thing,
corresponding thing with triceps.hat.
Once we're done with that,
we'll subtract off,
we'll essentially look at the residuals,
and we see that the partial correlation
of fat in triceps after thigh's
been partialled out is around 17%.
If you're lazy or
I'd like to say efficient,
then there's a library
that will do this for you.
It's a very popular thing to do.
If you run ppcor as a library,
then there's a command there called pcor.
Again, put your variables in a matrix and
run pcor and
you'll get the customary table.
And you can see that,
that's many significant digits.
We've calculated the exact same quantity.
Now from a time series point of view,
when you have an ARp model,
you'd probably like to partial
out more variables than just one.
In this example,
we stay with our body fat model and
show how to partial out
a couple variables.
It's really the same process.
Build a model of fat on thigh and
mid-arm, for instance.
So we're going to partial out thigh and
mid arm.
Build a model predicting fat off
of thigh and mid-arm, and then,
subtract the linear component.
Do the same thing with triceps.
We're taking the linear
predictor of fat on thigh and
mid-arm, and essentially,
getting rid of that linear contribution.
We'll take a correlation.
Does it surprise you that the partial
correlation, in this case, is higher?
Now, how does this work when we're
dealing with the time series?
We have, let's say stochastic
variables apart from X theta, Xt+h.
We'll try to find the effect of X of t
on X of t + h, all the way to the right,
after we control for or partial out
the intervening random variables.
So, we're going to use I think
a very natural notation,
x hat t + h will be the value
predicted at the position,
t + h, by using the several
random variables preceding.
We won't include Xt in the model,
but we'll go from Xt + 1,
all the way through X sub t + h- 1.
In other words,
the variables in the middle.
The subscripts that we're using
on our coefficients for the betas
are really just telling you how far away
you are from the thing you're predicting.
So beta1 is just one step
away from x hat t + h,
beta2 is the coefficient,
two steps away and so on.
Interestingly, due to stationarity,
we can find a relationship for
X hat t using the very same variables.
We're going to use the same coefficients,
but
look which coefficients
are with which variables now?
Again, the subscript from the data
tells you how far away you
are from the thing you're
trying to predict.
So, beta1 is one way,
beta2 is two way and so on.
Now we're going to suppress some
details on just how this is done
in a time series rather than,
as you see here for stochastic process.
So we won't worry about how
the estimation is done.
But at this point, I think you
can see what we're about to do.
We've got a predictor for X hat t + h.
We got a predictor for X hat t.
And what we'll do is partial out
the intervening the random variables in
the middle.
We'll do that by looking at the residuals,
and then finding a correlation.
So we're going to remove the linear
effects of all terms in between.
That's how your partial
autocorrelation plot is obtained.
By getting rid of the linear effects of
terms between two random variables at
a certain lag, or a certain distance away.
At this point, especially in a simple
linear regression context, you should feel
very comfortable partialling out
a variable and you should know now and
be able to a friend,
just what it is the PACF is measuring.